behavior & heuristics model are also as if and it is ok

**Intro :**

- 3 catégories de modèles en éco : neoclassique (utility), behavioral et heuristic
	- néoclassique : typiquement la théorie du choix rationnel (RCT) ou théorie de l'utilité espérée (EUT)
	- behavioral: les modèles développés pour répondre au fait que les expériences montraient que les hyp de base de la RCT étaient systématiquement violées. Ici il y a toujours l'utilité mais sa maximisation est contraintes par des hyp supplémentaires.
	- heuristic: idem pour palier aux défauts de la RCT, mais ici pas de maximisation d'utilité, seulement une réponse comportementale qui suit certaines règles heuristiques/automatique




définition de la vision « as if » des modèles :
« Broadly speaking, as-if models attempt to account for the observable choices that
individuals make, but do not pretend to capture the underlying psychological
mechanisms that might generate those choices. Some underlying choice-
generating mechanism, such as utility maximization, is attached to the model.
However, in the as-if approach the decision theorist is agnostic about whether
this mechanism actually operates in the mind of the decision maker. She may
even deem, and explicitly acknowledge, that the posited mechanism and its
components (such as the utility function, the preference relation or the heuristic
rules), are only fictional constructs. Nonetheless, the decision theorist explains,
describes or predicts the decision maker’s choices as if they were generated by
the posited psychological mechanism at issue. Insofar as the as-if model is
capable of accounting for the decision maker’s choice behaviour or indicating ways to effectively control it for economic policy purposes, the model is considered
scientifically valid. »

le critère de scientificité/acceptabilité est donné à la fin (souligné)

son but est de dire qu’on peut justifier le as if (but it is ok) via un certain anti-réalisme

checker Vromen 2022

Summing up the first two arguments, the preferences of actual decision makers
appear to be often incomplete, intransitive and unstable. Therefore, the complete,
transitive and stable preferences featured in CPT should not be understood as
entities actually existing in the decision maker’s mind but as theoretical
constructs existing in the decision theorist’s mind, through which she explains,
describes or predicts the decision maker’s choice behaviour.

Il défend ensuite une position antiréaliste pour justifier épistémologiquement une vision as if des modèles
« These entities and mechanism are best
seen as fictional and possibly false posits that, however, help decision theorists to
‘save’ choice-behaviour phenomena, that is, to describe observable choice-
behaviours in a true, or approximately true, way. »

